CHAPTER I. THOUGHT AND CHARACTER The aphorism, As a man thinketh in his heart,
not only embraces the whole of man's being, but is so comprehensive as to reach out to every
condition and circumstance of his life. A man is literally what he thinks, his character being the
complete sum of all his thoughts. As the plant springs from, and could not be without, the seed,
so every act of a man springs from the hidden seeds of his thought, and could not have appeared
this applies equally to those acts called spontaneous and unpremeditated as to those
which are deliberately executed. Act is the blossom of thought, and joy and suffering are
its fruits. Thus does a man garner in the sweet and bitter fruitage of his own husbandry. Thought
in the mind hath made us, what we are by thought we wrought and built. If a man's mind hath evil
thoughts, pain comes on him as comes the wheel the ox behind. If one endure in purity of thought,
joy follows him as his own shadow. Sure. Man is a growth by law, and not a creation by artifice,
and cause and effect is as absolute and undeviating in the hidden realm of thought as in the world of
visible and material things. A noble and godlike character is not a thing of favor or chance,
but is the natural result of continued effort and right thinking, the effect of long-cherished
association with godlike thoughts. An ignoble and bestial character by the same process
is the result of the continued harboring of groveling thoughts. Man is made or unmade by
himself. In the armory of thought he forges the weapons by which he destroys himself.
He also fashions the tools with which he builds for himself heavenly mansions of joy and strength
and peace. By the right choice and true application of thought, man ascends to the divine perfection.
By the abuse and wrong application of thought, he descends below the level of beast. Between
these two extremes are all of the grades of character, and man is their maker and master.
Of all the beautiful truths pertaining to the soul which have been restored and brought to light in
this age, none is more gladdening or fruitful of divine promise and confidence than this,
that man is the master of thought, the molder of character, and the maker and shaper of condition,
environment, and destiny. As a being of power, intelligence, and love, and the lord of his own
thoughts, man holds the key to every situation, and contains within himself that transforming
and regenerative agency by which he may make himself what he wills. Man is always the master,
even in his weakest and most abandoned state. But in his weakness and degradation, he is the
foolish master who misgoverns his household. When he begins to reflect upon his condition,
and to search diligently for the law upon which his being is established, he then becomes the
wise master, directing his energies with intelligence, and fashioning his thoughts to
fruitful issues. Such is the conscious master, and man can only thus become by discovering
within himself the laws of thought, which discovery is totally a matter of application,
self-analysis, and experience. Only by much searching and mining are golden diamonds obtained,
and man can find every truth connected with his being if he will dig deep into the mind of his
soul. And that he is the maker of his character, the molder of his life, and the builder of his
destiny, he may unerringly prove. If he will watch, control, and alter his thoughts, tracing
their effects upon himself, upon others, and upon his life and circumstances, if he will link cause
and effect by patient practice and investigation, utilizing his every experience, even to the most
trivial, as a means of obtaining that knowledge of himself. In this direction, as in no other,
is the law absolute that, he that seeketh findeth, and to him that knocketh, it shall be opened.
For only by patience, practice, and ceaseless
opportunity, can a man enter the door of the temple of knowledge.
End of chapter 1 Thought and Character